[Substrate.io] Chain Specification (#27)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: develop/blockchains/deployment/generate-chain-specs.md

---
title: Generate Chain Specs
description: Describes the role of the chain specification in a network, how to specify its parameters when starting a node, and how to customize and distribute it.
---

# Generate Chain Specs

## Introduction

A _chain specification_ collects information that describes a Polkadot SDK-based network. A chain specification is a crucial parameter when starting a node, providing the genesis configurations, bootnodes, and other parameters relating to that particular network. It identifies the network a blockchain node connects to, the other nodes it initially communicates with, and the initial state that nodes must agree on to produce blocks.

The chain specification is defined using the [`ChainSpec`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/struct.GenericChainSpec.html){target=\_blank} struct. This struct separates the information required for a chain into two parts:

> - A _client specification_ contains information the _node_ uses to communicate with network participants and send data to telemetry endpoints. Many of these chain specification settings can be overridden by command-line options when starting a node or can be changed after the blockchain has started

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Client Specification** - contains information the _node_ uses to communicate with network participants and send data to telemetry endpoints. Many of these chain specification settings can be overridden by command-line options when starting a node or can be changed after the blockchain has started
```

> - The initial _genesis state_ that all nodes in the network agree on. The genesis state must be established when the blockchain is first started, and it cannot be changed thereafter without starting an entirely new blockchain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Initial Genesis State** -  agreed upon by all nodes in the network. It must be set when the blockchain is first started and cannot be changed after that without starting a whole new blockchain
```

## Node Settings Customization

For the node, the chain specification controls information such as:

- The bootnodes the node will communicate with
- The server endpoints for the node to send telemetry data to
- The human and machine-readable names for the network the node will connect to

The chain specification can be customized to include additional information. For example, you can configure the node to connect to specific blocks at specific heights to prevent long-range attacks when syncing a new node from genesis.

Note that you can customize node settings after genesis. However, nodes only add peers that use the same [`protocolId`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_parachain_lib/chain_spec/trait.ChainSpec.html#tymethod.protocol_id){target=_blank}.

## Genesis Configuration Customization

> All nodes in the network must agree on the genesis state before they can agree on any subsequent blocks. The information configured in the genesis portion of a chain specification is used to create a genesis block. When you start the first node, it takes effect and cannot be overridden with command-line options. However, you can configure some information in the genesis portion of a chain specification. For example, you can customize the genesis portion of the chain specification to include information such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All nodes in the network must agree on the genesis state before they can agree on any subsequent blocks. The information configured in the genesis portion of a chain specification is used to create a genesis block. When you start the first node, it takes effect and cannot be overridden with command-line options. However, you can configure some information in the genesis section of a chain specification. For example, you can customize it to include information such as:
```

- Initial account balances
- Accounts that are initially part of a governance council
- The account that controls the `sudo` key
- Any other genesis state for a pallet

Nodes also require the compiled Wasm to execute the runtime logic on the chain, so the initial runtime must also be supplied in the chain specification.

## Declaring storage items for a runtime

> A runtime usually requires some storage items to be configured at genesis. This includes the initial state for pallets, for example, how much balance `Alice` or `Bob` has, or the account with sudo permissions.
> 
> These storage values are configured in the genesis portion of the chain specification. You can either create a [patch](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/index.html#chain-spec-formats){target=_blank}  file for [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/chain_spec_genesis/index.html){target=_blank} to ingest, or if you're using `chain_spec.rs`, the pallet can be configured in the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A runtime usually requires some storage items to be configured at genesis. This includes the initial state for pallets, for example, how much balance specific accounts have, or which account will have sudo permissions.

These storage values are configured in the genesis portion of the chain specification. You can create a [patch](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/index.html#chain-spec-formats){target=_blank} file for [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/chain_spec_genesis/index.html){target=_blank} to ingest or use `chain_spec.rs`, and the pallet genesis state can be configured in the source code.
```

## Chain specification JSON format

> Users generally work with the JSON format of the chain specification. Internally, the chain specification is embodied by the [`GenericChainSpec`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/struct.GenericChainSpec.html){target=\_blank} struct, with specific properties accessible through the [`ChainSpec`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/trait.ChainSpec.html){target=\_blank} struct. The chain specification includes the following keys:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users generally work with the JSON format of the chain specification. Internally, the chain specification is embedded in the [`GenericChainSpec`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/struct.GenericChainSpec.html){target=\_blank} struct, with specific properties accessible through the [`ChainSpec`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/trait.ChainSpec.html){target=\_blank} struct. The chain specification includes the following keys:
```

- `name` - the human-readable name for the network
- `id` - the machine-readable identifier for the network
- `chainType` - the type of chain to start (refer to [ChainType](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/enum.ChainType.html){target=\_blank} for more details)
- `bootNodes` - a list of multiaddresses belonging to the chain's boot nodes
- `telemetryEndpoints` - an optional list of multiaddresses for telemetry endpoints, with verbosity levels ranging from 0 to 9 (0 being the lowest verbosity)
- `protocolId` - the optional protocol identifier for the network
- `forkId` - an optional fork ID that should typically be left empty; it can be used to signal a fork at the network level when two chains share the same genesis hash
- `properties` - custom properties provided as a key-value JSON object
- `codeSubstitutes` - an optional mapping of block numbers to Wasm code
- `genesis` - the genesis configuration for the chain

For example, the following JSON shows a basic chain specification file:

```json
--8<-- "code/develop/blockchains/deployment/generate-chain-specs/basic-chain-specs.json"
``` 

## Creating a Custom Chain Specification

> To create a custom chain specification, you can use the [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/staging_chain_spec_builder/index.html){target=\_blank} tool. This is a CLI tool that is used to generate chain specifications from the runtime of a node. To install the tool, run the following command:

Reviewer: The phrase `following command` is used many times throughout the page. Replace in some places with synonyms

```bash
cargo install staging-chain-spec-builder
```

To verify the installation, run the following command:

```bash
chain-spec-builder --help
```

### Plain Chain Specifications

To create a plain chain specification, you can use the following command within your project:

```bash
chain-spec-builder create -r <RUNTIME_WASM_PATH> <INSERT_COMMAND> 
```

> Ensure to replace `<RUNTIME_WASM_PATH>` with the path to the runtime Wasm file and `<INSERT_COMMAND>` with the command to insert the runtime into the chain specification. The available commands are:

Reviewer: Maybe you should add a sentence or a note saying that the runtime needs to have been compiled before doing this step

description: Describes the role of the chain specification in a network, how to specify its parameters when starting a node, and how to customize and distribute it.
---

# Generate Chain Specs

## Introduction

A chain specification collects information that describes a Polkadot SDK-based network. A chain specification is a crucial parameter when starting a node, providing the genesis configurations, bootnodes, and other parameters relating to that particular network. It identifies the network a blockchain node connects to, the other nodes it initially communicates with, and the initial state that nodes must agree on to produce blocks.

The chain specification is defined using the [`ChainSpec`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/struct.GenericChainSpec.html){target=\_blank} struct. This struct separates the information required for a chain into two parts:

- **Client specification** - contains information the _node_ uses to communicate with network participants and send data to telemetry endpoints. Many of these chain specification settings can be overridden by command-line options when starting a node or can be changed after the blockchain has started

> - **Initial genesis state** -  agreed upon by all nodes in the network. It must be set when the blockchain is first started and cannot be changed after that without starting a whole new blockchain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Initial genesis state** - agreed upon by all nodes in the network. It must be set when the blockchain is first started and cannot be changed after that without starting a whole new blockchain
```

## Genesis Configuration Customization

All nodes in the network must agree on the genesis state before they can agree on any subsequent blocks. The information configured in the genesis portion of a chain specification is used to create a genesis block. When you start the first node, it takes effect and cannot be overridden with command-line options. However, you can configure some information in the genesis section of a chain specification. For example, you can customize it to include information such as:

- Initial account balances
- Accounts that are initially part of a governance council
- The account that controls the `sudo` key
- Any other genesis state for a pallet

Nodes also require the compiled Wasm to execute the runtime logic on the chain, so the initial runtime must also be supplied in the chain specification. For a more detailed look at customizing the genesis chain specification, be sure to check out the [Polkadot SDK Docs](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/chain_spec_genesis/index.html){target=_blank}.

> ## Declaring storage items for a runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Declaring Storage Items for a Runtime
```

A runtime usually requires some storage items to be configured at genesis. This includes the initial state for pallets, for example, how much balance specific accounts have, or which account will have sudo permissions.

> These storage values are configured in the genesis portion of the chain specification. You can create a [patch](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/index.html#chain-spec-formats){target=_blank} file for [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/chain_spec_genesis/index.html){target=_blank} to ingest or use `chain_spec.rs`, and the pallet genesis state can be configured in the source code.

Reviewer 3: hi @michalkucharczyk ! Thank you for the feedback

What would be the example precisely? I'm having trouble finding it

> These storage values are configured in the genesis portion of the chain specification. You can create a [patch](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/index.html#chain-spec-formats){target=_blank} file for [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/chain_spec_genesis/index.html){target=_blank} to ingest or use `chain_spec.rs`, and the pallet genesis state can be configured in the source code.

Reviewer 4: If I understand correctly, you are looking for something like this:
https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/a4791617241732f4fecafe21e12c16b7fe42f73e/cumulus/polkadot-parachain/src/chain_spec/asset_hubs.rs#L136-L151

But instead of calling:
```
.with_genesis_config_preset_name("genesis")
```
you want to call:
```
.with_genesis_config_patch(json!({...})
```

like in this code:
https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/a4791617241732f4fecafe21e12c16b7fe42f73e/substrate/client/chain-spec/src/chain_spec.rs#L964-L988

I think we don't have a pure json patches in our codebase - all chain specs are now based on embedded presets.

> These storage values are configured in the genesis portion of the chain specification. You can create a [patch](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/index.html#chain-spec-formats){target=_blank} file and ingest it using the [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/chain_spec_genesis/index.html){target=_blank} utility, that is explained in the [Creating a Custom Chain Specification](#creating-a-custom-chain-specification) section.

Reviewer 4: I think a bad link is used here:
```suggestion
These storage values are configured in the genesis portion of the chain specification. You can create a [patch](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/index.html#chain-spec-formats){target=_blank} file and ingest it using the [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/staging_chain_spec_builder/index.html){target=_blank} utility, that is explained in the [Creating a Custom Chain Specification](#creating-a-custom-chain-specification) section.
```

The link that was used here is a in-depth guide, and for sure it is worth keeping it:
https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/reference_docs/chain_spec_genesis/index.html

> ## Chain specification JSON format

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Chain Specification JSON Format
```

- `name` - the human-readable name for the network
- `id` - the machine-readable identifier for the network
- `chainType` - the type of chain to start (refer to [ChainType](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/enum.ChainType.html){target=\_blank} for more details)
- `bootNodes` - a list of multiaddresses belonging to the chain's boot nodes
- `telemetryEndpoints` - an optional list of multiaddresses for telemetry endpoints, with verbosity levels ranging from 0 to 9 (0 being the lowest verbosity)
- `protocolId` - the optional protocol identifier for the network
- `forkId` - an optional fork ID that should typically be left empty; it can be used to signal a fork at the network level when two chains share the same genesis hash
- `properties` - custom properties provided as a key-value JSON object
- `codeSubstitutes` - an optional mapping of block numbers to Wasm code

> - `genesis` - the genesis configuration for the chain

Reviewer 3: hi @michalkucharczyk, I have some doubts here as well. I believe that removing the whole list of items and just referencing that link would provide a bad user experience for developers who would have to go back and forth between the content. 

Wdyt about adding a reference to https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/index.html#intro-chain-specification at the bottom of this section?

> - `name` - the human-readable name for the network
> - `id` - the machine-readable identifier for the network
> - `chainType` - the type of chain to start (refer to [ChainType](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/enum.ChainType.html){target=\_blank} for more details)
> - `bootNodes` - a list of multiaddresses belonging to the chain's boot nodes
> - `telemetryEndpoints` - an optional list of multiaddresses for telemetry endpoints, with verbosity levels ranging from 0 to 9 (0 being the lowest verbosity)
> - `protocolId` - the optional protocol identifier for the network
> - `forkId` - an optional fork ID that should typically be left empty; it can be used to signal a fork at the network level when two chains share the same genesis hash
> - `properties` - custom properties provided as a key-value JSON object
> - `codeSubstitutes` - an optional mapping of block numbers to Wasm code
> - `genesis` - the genesis configuration for the chain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`name`** - the human-readable name for the network
- **`id`** - the machine-readable identifier for the network
- **`chainType`** - the type of chain to start (refer to [`ChainType`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/sc_chain_spec/enum.ChainType.html){target=\_blank} for more details)
- **`bootNodes`** - a list of multiaddresses belonging to the chain's boot nodes
- **`telemetryEndpoints`** - an optional list of multiaddresses for telemetry endpoints with verbosity levels ranging from 0 to 9 (0 being the lowest verbosity)
- **`protocolId`** - the optional protocol identifier for the network
- **`forkId`** - an optional fork ID that should typically be left empty; it can be used to signal a fork at the network level when two chains share the same genesis hash
- **`properties`** - custom properties provided as a key-value JSON object
- **`codeSubstitutes`** - an optional mapping of block numbers to Wasm code
- **`genesis`** - the genesis configuration for the chain
```

For example, the following JSON shows a basic chain specification file:

```json
--8<-- "code/develop/blockchains/deployment/generate-chain-specs/basic-chain-specs.json"
``` 

## Creating a Custom Chain Specification

To create a custom chain specification, you can use the [`chain-spec-builder`](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/staging_chain_spec_builder/index.html){target=\_blank} tool. This is a CLI tool that is used to generate chain specifications from the runtime of a node. To install the tool, run the following command:

```bash
cargo install staging-chain-spec-builder
```

To verify the installation, run the following:

```bash
chain-spec-builder --help
```

### Plain Chain Specifications

To create a plain chain specification, you can use the following utility within your project:

```bash

> chain-spec-builder create -r <RUNTIME_WASM_PATH> <INSERT_COMMAND> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
chain-spec-builder create -r <INSERT_RUNTIME_WASM_PATH> <INSERT_COMMAND> 
```

```

!!! note

    Before running the command, ensure that the runtime has been compiled and is available at the specified path.

> Ensure to replace `<RUNTIME_WASM_PATH>` with the path to the runtime Wasm file and `<INSERT_COMMAND>` with the command to insert the runtime into the chain specification. The available commands are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ensure to replace `<INSERT_RUNTIME_WASM_PATH>` with the path to the runtime Wasm file and `<INSERT_COMMAND>` with the command to insert the runtime into the chain specification. The available commands are:
```

- `patch` - overwrites the runtime's default genesis config with the provided patch. You can check the following [patch file](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/master/substrate/bin/utils/chain-spec-builder/tests/input/patch.json){target=\_blank} as a reference

> - `full` - build the genesis config for runtime using the JSON file. No defaults will be used. As a reference, you can check the following [full file](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/master/substrate/bin/utils/chain-spec-builder/tests/input/full.json){target=\_blank}

Reviewer 4: Maybe better use frozen the links? (I mean instead of master use some hard-coded commit sha?)
Not sure if you have some agreed policy about that.

Reviewer 5: Used version tag as follows: https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/polkadot-stable1985-rc1/substrate/bin/utils/chain-spec-builder/tests/input/full.json

> - `patch` - overwrites the runtime's default genesis config with the provided patch. You can check the following [patch file](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/polkadot-stable1985-rc1/substrate/bin/utils/chain-spec-builder/tests/input/patch.json){target=\_blank} as a reference
> - `full` - build the genesis config for runtime using the JSON file. No defaults will be used. As a reference, you can check the following [full file](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/polkadot-stable1985-rc1/substrate/bin/utils/chain-spec-builder/tests/input/full.json){target=\_blank}
> - `default` - gets the default genesis config for the runtime and uses it in `ChainSpec`. Please note that the default genesis config may not be valid. For some runtimes, initial values should be added there (e.g., session keys, babe epoch)
> - `named-preset` - uses named preset provided by the runtime to build the chain spec

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`patch`** - overwrites the runtime's default genesis config with the provided patch. You can check the following [patch file](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/polkadot-stable1985-rc1/substrate/bin/utils/chain-spec-builder/tests/input/patch.json){target=\_blank} as a reference
- **`full`** - build the genesis config for runtime using the JSON file. No defaults will be used. As a reference, you can check the following [full file](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/polkadot-stable1985-rc1/substrate/bin/utils/chain-spec-builder/tests/input/full.json){target=\_blank}
- **`default`** - gets the default genesis config for the runtime and uses it in `ChainSpec`. Please note that the default genesis config may not be valid. For some runtimes, initial values should be added there (e.g., session keys, BABE epoch)
- **`named-preset`** - uses named preset provided by the runtime to build the chain spec
```

### Raw Chain Specifications

With runtime upgrades, the blockchain's runtime can be upgraded with newer business logic. Chain specifications contain information structured in a way that the node's runtime can understand. For example, consider this excerpt of a common entry for a chain specification:

```json
"sudo": {
  "key": "5GrwvaEF5zXb26Fz9rcQpDWS57CtERHpNehXCPcNoHGKutQY"
}
```

> This key and its associated value are human-readable text in the JSON file. However, this information can't be stored in this format in Substrate’s underlying storage structures. Before you can use the chain specification to initialize the genesis storage for a node, the human-readable keys must be transformed into actual storage keys that allow the values to be stored in the storage trie. This transformation is straightforward but requires the chain specification to be encoded in a format that node runtime can read.

Reviewer 4: Actually the plain, human readable format, can be used for initialization of the storage, but this involves converting the plain values into the trie storage items by the runtime.

We use raw format if we want to avoid this conversion - e.g. for long-live chains like testnets or production, to avoid potential changes in this conversion process which may happen when runtime is upgraded.

I'd rephrase this paragraph to make it more clear. IMO, currently it is slightly misleading.

Reviewer 3: Great! I rephrased it here - [94e3a4c](https://github.com/polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs/pull/27/commits/94e3a4cccfbd8b3c77e2809a05fe9b97d0941653)

Would you mind looking at it to see if it makes more sense now? @michalkucharczyk

Reviewer 4: Perfect. Thank you.

>   "key": "5GrwvaEF5zXb26Fz9rcQpDWS57CtERHpNehXCPcNoHGKutQY"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    "key": "5GrwvaEF5zXb26Fz9rcQpDWS57CtERHpNehXCPcNoHGKutQY"
```

> In the JSON file, the keys and associated values are in a human-readable format, which can be used to initialize the genesis storage. When the chain specification is loaded, the runtime converts these readable values into storage items within the trie. However, for long-lived networks like testnets or production chains, using the raw format for storage initialization is preferred. This avoids the need for conversion by the runtime and ensures that storage items remain consistent, even when runtime upgrades occur.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the plain chain-spec JSON file, the keys and associated values are in a human-readable format, which can be used to initialize the genesis storage. When the chain specification is loaded, the runtime converts these readable values into storage items within the trie. However, for long-lived networks like testnets or production chains, using the raw format for storage initialization is preferred. This avoids the need for conversion by the runtime and ensures that storage items remain consistent, even when runtime upgrades occur.
```

> To enable a node with an upgraded runtime to synchronize with a chain from genesis, the plain chain specification is encoded in a **raw** format.

Reviewer 4: not sure if it reads better? (feel free to ignore)
```suggestion
To enable a node with an upgraded runtime to synchronize with a chain from genesis, the plain chain specification is encoded into a **raw** format.
```

To enable a node with an upgraded runtime to synchronize with a chain from genesis, the plain chain specification is encoded in a raw format. The raw format allows the distribution of chain specifications that all nodes can use to synchronize the chain even after runtime upgrades.

To convert a plain chain specification to a raw chain specification, you can use the following utility:

```bash
chain-spec-builder convert-to-raw chain_spec.json
```

After the conversion to the raw format, the `sudo key` snippet looks like this:

```json
"0x50a63a871aced22e88ee6466fe5aa5d9": "0xd43593c715fdd31c61141abd04a99fd6822c8558854ccde39a5684e7a56da27d",
```

The raw chain specification can be used to initialize the genesis storage for a node.

## Where to Go Next

After generating a chain specification, you can use it to initialize the genesis storage for a node. Refer to the following guides to learn how to proceed with the deployment of your blockchain:

> - [Obtain CoreTime](TODO:update-path) - learn how to obtain the necessary CoreTime configuration to synchronize your blockchain’s timestamping and enhance its performance
> - [Deployment](TODO:update-path) - explore the steps required to deploy your chain specification, ensuring a smooth launch of your network and proper node operation
> - [Maintenance](TODO:update-path) - discover best practices for maintaining your blockchain post-deployment, including how to manage upgrades and monitor network health

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [**Obtain Coretime**](TODO:update-path) - learn how to obtain the necessary coretime configuration to synchronize your blockchain’s timestamping and enhance its performance
- [**Deployment**](TODO:update-path) - explore the steps required to deploy your chain specification, ensuring a smooth launch of your network and proper node operation
- [**Maintenance**](TODO:update-path) - discover best practices for maintaining your blockchain post-deployment, including how to manage upgrades and monitor network health
```
